all right good morning everybody welcome
back to the conversational money podcast
i hope you guys had an amazing weekend
so this is going to be a second week in
a row where i've had a guest on the show
and for this particular one i have
someone that
requires and demands your attention and
when i say that i mean that seriously
he's a former he's a former trader
in london
in 2011 he was city's most profitable
trader globally so he really really does
know his stuff he's also an inequality
economist as well
so i'm going to introduce him in a
moment but we're going to be talking
about um the importance of building
wealth and what that actually means i
think a lot of the time in society
we
misunderstand
what that means and he has a very very
unique take on what that means
especially with his background in the
world of trading and financial services
as a whole so it is my great great great
pleasure to welcome gary stevenson gary
welcome mate
thanks very much peter nice to uh be on
the show
so i know that i've given a very brief
kind of like overview of an introduction
to you there but
can you just give everyone kind of like
a quick
overview of you know who you are where
you started how you became a trader that
we can get into the whole wealth
creation because i think a lot of the
times when people think of traders they
think of millionaires who came from
a privileged background with a silver
spoon in their mouth
and for you
your story is very very inspiring in the
fact that it isn't that normal
traditional journey and
your outlook and the way you put things
is reflective of that experience as well
yeah so yeah as you say my background is
not really the typical background of a
trader i guess yeah so um i'm from
ilford which is in uh east london
um
and i managed to get into lse london
school of economics i started there in
2005.
um you know lse is like a sort of top
university but even once you get there
it's not easy to get a job as a trader
and um
everyone there was sort of
writing a million applications to all
the different investment banks i didn't
really know what i was doing but um i
heard that citibank used to hire one
trader a year through um through a card
game which was basically a maths game
and um when i was a kid i used to love
mata and i used to do math competitions
and stuff like this it's sort of like
not the coolest thing but it was my my
talent and i went in for this card game
and i won and um i got a job basically
as a trader as an interest rate trader
short-term interest rate trader for city
bank in london
um that started in june 2008 which uh
you you'll obviously immediately know it
was a few months before the uh
the lehman crisis the uh
the credit crunch um so yeah things blew
up pretty quickly when i was there
people in my team started to make or
lose pretty huge amounts of money um and
i just sort of
tried to get involved tried to make as
much money as i could try to understand
why the interest rates move how do they
move and um
i did quite well in the first couple of
years and uh after um a couple years
after 2008 like
i started to sort of really question
this narrative because traders and
economists have been predicting a big
recovery every single year um 2008 they
said it recovered 2009 2009 i recovered
in 2010 and um
because i come from a sort of poor
background i couldn't really see
things like the government money
printing like qe
affecting ordinary people i couldn't see
how that recovery was going to happen so
i started to bet that because
the measures weren't helping ordinary
people there would be no recovery and
then through that by the end of 2011 i
became citibank's globally most
profitable trader which was wow pretty
crazy um
and uh yeah i did it only really for
sort of another year and a bit after
that um because i every time i looked at
the economy and i had to put bets on i
thought you know things are going to be
really bad because
the government the economists don't have
a handle on inequality they're not
dealing with it so the future's going to
be bad then you know i kept betting the
future was going to be bad and i kept
being right and i kept making a lot of
money and um
yeah after a year and a half i just said
to my boss look i can't do this anymore
like i think i need to actually try and
tell people what's happening i'll try
and do something about it so uh see i
quit um then after i did a masters at
oxford sort of
talking to a load of posh economists
wearing capes and they weren't
interested and uh yeah now i'm out here
making videos on youtube writing
articles in newspapers on websites um
just trying to explain to people the
importance of inequality um
what's going to happen the future of the
economy and yeah talking to people like
you peter and we're going to explain
today some stuff about wealth i think
it's like super important because having
like traveled my journey from like a
poor background to like having a very
good job with rich people and making
quite a lot of money myself
i think there's a lot of ways in which
ordinary people are misled and as a
result don't really understand what
world is and how it works absolutely
absolutely and guys i have to say right
off the bat
straight away if you're not following on
youtube and you're not following him on
his social medias i will leave all of
the links in the show notes definitely
go and follow one thing that i love
about you and one of my followers um
tagged me in one of your videos on
instagram which i think linked to your
youtube
and the way you explain things is very
very simple so that anybody can
understand that and i i resonate with
that because i think
with within my experience in financial
services as well
the industry is very good at making
things overly complicated unnecessarily
so as well and it's almost done
intentionally because
the industry wants to be seen as the
experts you have to go to them in order
to do xyz and i think breaking it down
in very simple language is really
important and that's what you you tend
to do which is why i was really
interested to have you on this podcast
we've got youtube live and we've got
another podcast as well that we're going
to be recording so this will be a bit of
a series
to get kick this off then
what is the definition
or actually let's start here
what does society
misunderstand
about wealth and what wealth is
okay so i think for ordinary people and
you know like i said i come from a very
ordinary background when they think
about wealth and what it means to be
wealthy they're thinking about what job
have you got because for most ordinary
people
that's the difference between rich and
poor you know do you have a good job do
you have a bad job when you're most
ordinary people that's where the money
comes from
um so people think about what they think
about their job but your job is not
wealth your job and your salary is a
form of income and there's a big
difference between income and wealth
so let's explain what is wealth
basically right so you know
wealth is the ownership of assets that
you've accumulated right and the
the most obvious manifestation of that
in ordinary people's lives is do you own
a house or not do you want a flat or not
do you own the property that you live in
some people do and other people don't
and they have the rent
but even that is actually a very
limited and limiting understanding of
what wealth is because i think for
ordinary people especially nowadays
especially here where i am in london
it's so difficult just to get a house
that we just think that's what i want
that's what i need i want a house and
it's super important to get house and
it's difficult if you don't have one but
if we just understand welfare housing
that's super super limiting right
because the what wealth is is so much
more than that right
walk down your high street right
you see a massive supermarket
sainsbury's tesco's somebody owns that
you see i live here in the canary wharf
right there's a
load of skyscrapers down there somebody
owns those skyscrapers you know what i
mean somebody owns lloyd's bank on your
high street somebody owns your local pub
somebody owns all them restaurants you
know somebody owns h m all of these
shops right and you know that's just in
the city you go into the countryside
there's miles and miles of farmland
there's factories you know there's oil
fields there's there's iron mines you
know what i mean all of these things are
owned and i think for ordinary people
who are just struggling to save up to
buy a house you don't think like well
you know who owns the
who owns the skyscrapers who owns the
office buildings who owns the shopping
mall you know what i mean you don't
think that because ordinary people
basically never get to own those things
but they are all owned all of those
things are owned everything everything
you see when you go out there is owned
even the schools the hospitals they're
owned right so
once you broaden your understanding of
what is worth and you start walking down
the high street you start thinking
somebody owns this you know somebody
owns that shopping mall somebody owns
this office building that you work in
you know what i mean once you start
realizing those things you realize wow
there's there's a huge amount of wealth
in the world that i don't own you know
i'm sitting here now looking out the
window i can see the shard in a distance
tallest building in western europe
somebody owns that building you know
what i mean but ordinary people never
get to own these things so
the first my first message is there's a
huge amount of wealth
commercial wealth
shops
offices factories
natural resources like land and
mines and oil fields and you know those
windmills that give us electricity in
the sea these are all owned
well
so listeners might be thinking well i
don't know nobody who owns an iron mine
you know what i mean i don't know nobody
who owns
a skyscraper
so who owns these things and that leads
us to my first big point which is when
we understand wealth which is who owns
the actual things in our world in our
country and our cities
we realize that wealth is much much more
unequally distributed than income
which makes sense in a way because you
know one person could only work one job
but one person can own huge amounts of
property and buildings and natural
resources you know if we look at jeff
bezos the richest man in the world he's
got 200 billion you know which is 200
000 million
of assets of wealth and that people
sometimes i think visualize that as if
jeff bezos has a bank account somewhere
200 billion in it that's exactly not how
it works right
very very wealthy people do not have
bank accounts with enormous amounts of
cash well i mean they do but not 200
billion dollars of cash what they own is
resources and those resources are real
things that exist in the world and in
this country right they own buildings
corporate buildings that might be your
shopping center that might be a
supermarket there might be office
buildings they own factories they own
land there are natural resources so
there's
that's my message there's a huge amount
of real wealth in the world it's not an
abstract thing it's not just money in
the bank it's real resources buildings
natural resources companies hospital
schools things like that
and uh it's very very unequally
distributed and ordinary people who are
often struggling just to own the home
that they live in
don't often realize what an enormous
amount of wealth there is and how much
that ownership is concentrated amongst a
small number of
largely very very wealthy families
individuals
you make some really good points here
and
so my background is is very similar to
yours in terms of not from a wealthy
background at all so you tend to like
kind of work your way up and you know
you get earned good money and income
you're right income is just income
wealth is very very different and you've
religious to the fact that now that we
have a whole generation of people who
are struggling just to get the deposit
for that for the house that they will
eventually own and that will be
in most cases for most people
the biggest asset that they own during
their lifetime
so once you own that property you've got
your your foot on the ladder as it were
you're right it's very very difficult
then to put your head above the parapet
to see actually that there's all this
other stuff that you could be part
ownership in
my question is though
it's probably going to be twofold for
this and follow up
how much of a role do you think
number one education has to play in the
fact that number one there is this
misunderstanding of what true wealth is
and do you feel that there are actual
barriers that are that are practically
and
uh tangibly put in place
of people
attaining
assets in order to build real wealth on
in the long term
that's a very very good question because
um
you're kind of capturing here that
there's basically two sides to this
basically which is um
one people are misled and people are not
understanding what's happening
um but on the other side we have a
system that actually makes it very very
difficult for ordinary people to get
some of that wealth you know i mean so
there's there's this educational problem
this individual problem and there's also
this systemic problem so
all right let's first talk about
understanding why do people understand i
mean obviously they're not taught in
school you know people like yourself and
you know i do the same thing we put
videos on youtube trying to educate
people on what's happening that's super
important but one thing to
make clear is you know
i go out and i do a lot of campaigning
saying look
the super super rich are unbelievably
rich if they don't pay taxes we've got
to pay it it's going to affect us it's
going to affect our society
um
but you know a lot of these super rich
people obviously they don't agree with
my message they don't want to be taxed
more right but and they own things
you know some of those things they own
include you know newspapers you know
what i mean
yeah recently jeff bezos booked the
washington post right and then suddenly
the washington post is putting out
articles that oh we shouldn't tax the
rich you know what i mean jeff bezos
being rich is good for you and you know
look at who owns look at who owns the
times the telegraph the daily mail it's
all super super super rich people right
so they're sending out messages to
people saying
well the classic one which you see in
all the newspapers is oh this guy
stopped drinking coffee at starbucks he
stopped eating avocado toast and now
he's got a house and they want to send
this message to you that the reason why
young people and to be honest you know
this message is actually aimed at like
older people saying the reason that
young people can't afford property is
just because they're lazy
you know
of course like you know you love young
listeners out there and they know that's
a joke but that message goes out to
their parents and then their parents
don't realize we're creating a system
where it's so difficult for younger
people and you know then that represents
older people might not vote for parties
that want to make things fairer or they
might not support systems to make things
fair or to increase taxation on the rich
so
obviously you know i make videos saying
tax to rich you know i don't get no
funding from richard branson for that
you know what i mean i don't get a funny
flip of murdock but the super
billionaires they fund think tanks to
say don't tax the rich you know so they
send messages out there just telling
people
look just work hard and you'll be fine
and
then they want you to spend it all in um
louis vuitton you know what i mean
because they what they want is your
assets you know they want to own the
things that you want and that's not
because rich people are evil or rich
people are terrible i totally don't
believe that but you know i've been poor
and i've been rich and the fact is
once rich people have very high levels
of wealth
that generates a huge amount of income
yeah exactly and that is the sort of the
second key point that i want to make
that i want people to understand is that
once
you own wealth or own large amounts of
wealth that starts to generate an income
and that income can be enormous right
and you know for ordinary people that
you know might be trying to save up 20
grand 50 grand 100 grand if they're
lucky to buy a house those are not going
to generate huge amounts of wealth but
very wealthy people you know if
somebody's got 2 million pounds
that wealth will generate an income
maybe if you've got 2 million pounds
you'll probably be generating 50 60
grand a year off that 2 million pounds
if you've got 10 million pounds well
you'll be making like 300 grand a year
right if you're jeff bezos you've got
200 billion dollars then he's probably
making he's making about six
billion dollars a year right what is
that that's something like 20 million
dollars every day or something like that
right so
once people become very rich they
generate huge amounts of income not by
working just because they own those
assets right
and you know if you are making 300 grand
a year just for getting out of bed
because you own wealth because you own
assets and remember that's real things
properties supermarkets office buildings
but what will you do you know if you're
making 300 grand a year without working
you're not going to spend 300 grand a
year you're going to spend
100 grand you can live a great life
spend 100 grand a year and you're going
to use that 200 grand to buy other
assets so they that's what they do and
that's what they do 100 percent that's
what they need to reinvest yeah and
that's what you know that's what i do
you know i made money trading and now
i'm relatively wealthy and i'm an
investor and i spend the part of what i
make and live off it and the rest i
invest you know that's it's not the rich
people are evil it's just they're rich
because once you are rich you generate a
huge income and then it's very easy for
you to purchase assets but the problem
is
ordinary people who don't have that
wealth need those assets too and the
most obvious example of that is housing
but it's important to understand that
income that they make it don't come out
of thin air so when you go to tesco some
of that money goes to the workers in
tesco but some of it goes to the dude
who owns tesco and the dude who owns
that building you know what i mean yeah
and this is the same for every single
thing that you do when you go to the
barbers right somebody goes to the
barber and some of them when it goes to
the owner of the building and when you
work when you go to work in an office
building some of your wage goes to the
owner of that building so and you know
you see this all the time so the money
that goes to your mortgage you don't
disappear it goes to the owners of the
mortgage the money that goes on your
rent it don't disappear it goes to the
owner of the property right so
when you have this large amount of
inequality in wealth it generates
a massive flow of income from ordinary
people who need to live in those houses
who need to eat the food who need to go
to the supermarket who need to pay for
their bills that goes to the owners of
the assets right so it creates this
massive flow so the system as it is it
works really really well for the rich
and they want you to
be happy with it and accept it and they
don't want you to really know i think
they're really happy with people not
realizing that they own the skyscrapers
and they own the shops because otherwise
people would say hey like
why don't we get a share of this why
can't we own a bit of this you know i
mean so of course they're like totally
happy with things being this way and
as it goes
ordinary people get their wages they
give it to those rich guys and the rich
people use it to buy ordinary people's
houses and then ordinary people's kids
can't buy houses so that's the problem
um so yeah definitely there's the
informational problem that's why i'm
here you know that's why you do what you
do um
but there's also a systemic problem but
then you know
you also sort of ask the question of you
know what can what can people do
um you know i think a big part of what
you do and that's what we're talking
about today is
people need to understand that what's
out there you know i always call for
systemic change but you know this is an
investment channel you talk about
investment advice so if people
understand
that wealth exists
um
that it means
that wealthy people generate an income
from the rest of us then they need to do
what they can
and i'm saying this was a total
understanding of how difficult it can be
and how difficult it is for ordinary
people they need to understand that
your only way to get yourself to
financial security
of course you do need to get a good job
if you can and you need to try and get
your kids in the good jobs if you can
because you need the income yeah yeah
exactly you know you can't get the
wealth until you have the income it's
not you're going to get out of nowhere
but then once you have that income yeah
you need to look towards doing what they
do
building wealth and you know the first
thing for most people is as i've said as
you've said get that property get that
ownership and it's important to
understand if you get a property with a
mortgage
you know if you own like a 300 grand
property and you've got 250 grand
mortgage really effectively
the rich guy is still on your house
because you know they own like five six
of your house right so get that property
pay the mortgage down get that financial
security for yourself try and do that
for your children you know and that's um
it's difficult but that's what you need
to do but you know this balance and
we'll talk about it more is
what i always talk about is
we have this systemic problem where
because we're allowing the rich to get
so rich it's pushing house prices up and
that's meaning although people can't get
houses often but are selling their
houses
that's creating a systemic problem which
i think we need to look at how we can
deal with it politically we're using our
pressure as a group to enforce the
problem because you know we have in this
country the chancellor who sunk his dad
is literally a billionaire and remember
a billionaire is not a millionaire right
a billionaire has 1 000 million pounds
right that's an insane amount of money
um so he doesn't want the rich to pay
more taxes you know what i mean but if
we don't make them pay more taxes then
we got to pay their taxes and if we've
got to pay the taxes then we ain't going
to be able to afford to buy houses
so yeah it's a balance yeah so this this
this i've got so many questions swirling
in my head right now um
before i get on to like
the whole tackling the systemic issue
because i think that there is something
there and and there are common arguments
that you will see that the politicians
always throw out there uh specifically
before we get on to that
i'm interested to know your thoughts on
the state of social media in this
equation of
information education around what wealth
really is and the fundamental steps that
it takes in order to get yourself on the
ladder on the road to creating wealth
i hate social media
and people call me an influencer and i
hate that word
because
there is so much nonsense out there
that
is very very
it's
it's almost like over sexualizing the in
the contextual sense of information and
and click bait thumbnails all this kind
of stuff
where
it is information that is overly
simplified
simply to attract the the
an appeal to the greed in people
but at the end of it
it's only there literally to make
another person more money because of the
falsehoods of what wealth and the
perception of wealth is in today's
society with social media
and that's something that i struggle
with being on youtube i struggle with
being on instagram i constantly question
myself whether i'm actually adding to
the noise
how do you find it when you see you know
traders specifically on on instagram you
know in front of bentley's and all this
kind of stuff and they're young kids and
they're they're portraying this
lifestyle to appeal to other people like
them but really without any real
substance and real know-how on how to
get people there
i think you've captured it very well
there peter it's um
it's a crazy world out there on social
media and it's
the thing is look you spoke about
education right i understand young
people are coming out into this world
and you know
they've been taught shakespeare in
school and they've been taught nothing
about personal finances right so then
they're coming out
and then they're
they're living in a world that's going
to pay them 20 25 grand a year
and a house costs 600 grand
and um
you know and then they're seeing people
go off going off and working in the city
and making a million quid a year
and you know they're seeing people on
instagram saying i made a million pound
on bitcoin or
you know i can guarantee making money
trading on the internet and you know
they're watching movies a wolf of wall
street american psycho and big short
and uh you know they're seeing bitcoin
advertised on buses and everyone's
outstanding made so much money on it and
i think like
in a world where if you're just an
ordinary person
and you just want to work
hard and get like a place to raise a
family
you know my dad works for the post
office for 35 years right and he's got a
house now you can't do that nowadays so
in a world where ordinary people
young people young men and women who
just want to get financial security
they can't do that by taking a sensible
route
and then suddenly they're bombarded by
things like you say some dude on
instagram with a lamborghini saying it's
easy
they're thinking oh my god i'm an idiot
i need to get involved with this you
know i mean i'm not doing this i'm a
loser that's almost yeah but not even
the thing i want to add to that is that
we've made it so difficult to get even
financial security you've taken the
sensible route you know what i mean
because work isn't working and you know
like if you make the sensible route work
then the sensible people will take it
but we've created the world where
increasingly the sensible route is not
working for young people you know i mean
i get messages from a lot of young men
especially saying look i don't know how
i'm going to get a house i don't know
i'm going to get family you know what i
mean so then
when you create such financial
insecurity then people
are vulnerable basically and then you
see people popping up on social media
and i think some of them some of some of
them know they're taking you for a ride
but other people really they're just
they're just in it for hype like they
they see it's working because they they
they're putting out messages and
people are loving it you know i mean
the big thing
that is coming up at the moment there's
two big things one is crypto but the
thing which as a former trader i'm more
equipped to talk about is online trading
that is being advertised to people
really really aggressively right and um
there's a massive increase in it like
ig index users nearly doubled free
traders users up about 300 400 percent
millions of people using etoro like
and you used to youtube it and people
like guaranteed strategy to make money
and
i see messages on instagram of people
like posting all their trades right um
is that if i talk a little bit about one
two three i'm not gonna mention them by
name right go for it go for it go for it
so
well first of all the beginning of code
i put some articles out right saying i
think these things are gonna happen you
know my job is a trade that's why i made
some market predictions i said i think
stock prices will go up gold price will
go up this is about 18 months ago
and um those things happened and a lot
of people contacted me right and people
saying i don't know what to do and i
told him you can you can bet on these
things if you want you know maybe that
was a bit you know irresponsible of me
but you know i wasn't i wasn't in the
investment game at that point so like
okay people jumped in and um a lot of
these guys lost money and i was like how
did you manage to lose money right like
i gave you guys because they don't
understand they don't understand the
risk management side to it though well
what it is is they get dragged into this
social media world and people tell you
it's easy do this do that bet on this
bit on that right and um this guy sent
me like a picture that he got from a
guy's following an instagram right
and the guy has posted like 10 trades
and he's trading gold right and he's
made money on every trade and what he's
doing is he's selling gold at like 17 28
dollars 128 and buying it back at 1727
okay which is like the tiniest tiniest
little move right and like these prices
move up and down all the time so if
you're literally waiting for that 0.1
percent i think it's even less than 0.1
move you'll probably get it right
and he's done that ten times right and
each time he's done that he's made five
hundred dollars and he's made five
thousand dollars all right
and he said it's easy i make money every
time right and i was thinking how's this
guy managed to make you 500 on such a
tiny tiny tiny little move right so i
did the maths each single one of them
trades was worth 600 000 pounds each one
of them trades right this is the thing
that they don't show though that's and
that's the thing that frustrates me
they'll show oh these are the problems
that i've made but okay how much money
have you put on the line especially for
exactly this stuff you're in debt if it
goes the wrong way that's the thing what
these guys are doing yeah yeah they put
massive massive bets on things that are
99 likely to happen and then you make
like 100 quid right and what but in that
one percent it doesn't happen these guys
could lose half a million pounds
they're risking half a million pounds to
make a hundred pounds and
by betting on something that's almost
certain you know what i mean
and you know
it's insanity
you could do this in sports betting
right like you could wait until
liverpool are like three no up and then
bet a million pounds on them to win and
you win 50 quid and you could do that
every single week right but that's what
that's essentially what they're doing
right they're looking at things are
almost going to happen and betting a
million quid on it and then if you do
that of course you'll win again and
again and again and again and again
right but you'll win 50 quid each time
and what happens when you lose
and it's ins and but of course like
people watching it you know some of
these guys are like 18 quid betting
their student loan money 18 years old
but then they're using loan money right
and they don't know they just see here's
a guy with a lamborghini with gold
chains
listing 20 trades making 20 trades all
winning saying i'm making 10 grand a day
you know what i mean
but it's
i mean you know you know the fsa the fca
the financial regulators can't go and
regulate everything on instagram but
like
if you understand what's happening it is
insane what some of these guys are
saying it's totally insane and
i worry i worry and you know like you
know
we got put in touch on instagram and
like the first thing i did i have to
look at your videos and we had a talk
right because i worry there's a lot of
guys out there that are giving such
irresponsible advice you know i saw that
the stuff you did was was good advice
but like how do the people out there
know like it's it's man it's a difficult
world for the ordinary people and that's
that's what i that's what keeps me going
it's like i watch videos sometimes and
i've stopped now because it used to
anger me and i used to get really
frustrated like some of this nonsense
that people spew and i'm like okay so if
you're an 18 year old just start you
know you you've popped onto into onto
youtube you're gonna find all these
videos and you have no idea what's real
what's wrong what's incorrect what's
factual what's fallacy you have no idea
you're just gonna go with the one that's
telling the best story and i think it
links really nicely into this
conversation around you know the
importance of building wealth because
now we can get into the real
nitty-gritty we know that obviously
there's that educational gap you and i
are trying to plug and provide as much
education as we can in our own mediums
however the larger issue is
systemic
so how do we go about actually making
those changes because the politicians
will say well if you tax the wealthy
more
what they'll basically do is they'll
just move their companies and they'll
move abroad and then you'll have a whole
load of the population twenty thousand
ten thousand people whoever many people
they're employed unemployed there'll be
a burden on the tax system and therefore
you then have or the benefit system and
then you have to try and get those
people back into the workforce but if
those people are not employing because
they've moved their businesses it's
futile you're going around in circles so
how do we go about systemic change where
do we actually begin
you know i was talking to a friend about
this other day right and this friend of
mine he works for the government and
used to work in like counter-terrorism
you know i mean and um
we were talking about this look if you
tax them
they'll leave and it's not going to work
and um
what i said to him was look if we don't
tax these guys then what we are looking
at
is a slow-motion economic disaster for
the people of this country and for the
people of this world right so
what he said was actually like this is
similar to what i do because look it's
not easy to stop terrorism it's not easy
to stop terrorists but if we don't do it
it's a disaster right so we have to try
and do it right and it's the same with
taxing the rich right it's not easy to
tax them they're on the newspapers
they've got the best tax accountants
they're super super rich they're super
super powerful but if we don't find a
way to tax them then they will
increasingly own more and more and more
of the wealth in this country and in the
world and this planet and that will mean
our lives will get worse and worse
someone say you know you can look at
other countries or other times in
history in this country where inequality
is very very high and what are the
outcomes like for ordinary people
they're always very very very bad right
and
it's no coincidence that if you go back
and look
when people say it's impossible i always
say well actually we did it we did it if
you study a bit of history you'll see
after the second world war basically all
the countries of europe decided look
we're not going to do this no more we
demand that
the governments and the wealthy pay for
good education good health care good
housing so that people can live good
lives right and because all the
countries did it together there was
nowhere for the rich people to run to
you know what i mean and you know we're
in a similar situation here now right
where
things are getting worse for ordinary
people northern families in this country
but it's not just in this country you
know i used to live in japan japan is a
is a relatively equal country but it's
going the same way you know in the usa
things are getting worse and worse
but it's the same france italy spain
it's all the big countries right so
it's happening everywhere
and i think covert is a really good
opportunity in a way right obviously
it's a terrible thing that's happened
but it's making the situation worse for
every country in the same way and it's
making it more obvious that we need to
work together countries need to work
together and um
look if we don't do something it will be
a disaster i don't do this because i
think it's easy i do this because i
think it's necessary it's necessary so
it's a question of like there's a
necessary thing if you don't do it
there'll be a disaster it'll be
difficult it will require probably
international cooperation it will
require lots of people to work together
to push the power pool to push the
politicians to do it but if you don't do
it we're losing our houses your kids are
losing your houses your grandkids will
be poor they'll not have good quality
houses they'll not have good quality
jobs so
so yeah of course 100 is difficult and
you know i'm not going to do it by
myself on youtube but if enough people
get behind me and start doing their own
thing and start realizing look we need
to push for this we need to push for
more equality of wealth equality of
opportunity then it can happen and it
was done after the second world war but
look it's not going to be easy and you
know i don't know whether we're going to
win or not but i know that i'm going to
fight for the side that's trying to make
things better
what do you think because
i've always had a look at this and i've
always kind of struggled and i i
appreciate it but i understand that it
is it is the source of all kinds of
worries and troubles including the one
that we're talking about today
capitalism
that is the big world because it is
capitalism enables the jeff bezos and an
elon musk to acquire the wealth that
they have
what does it say about capitalism all
right so like
as you know i worked in a bank for a
long time and then i went to university
i studied economics right and it's only
really in the last sort of one and a
half years
i've been started to be sort of seen as
portrayed as an activist in a sense i
mean i suppose that's what i am right
like i'm pushing for
less inequality a fairer tax system a
better economy so yeah i suppose i'm an
activist right and because i'm pushing
for more equality i get drawn into sort
of left-wing activist circles this kind
of thing i never really viewed myself as
a particularly left-wing guy i worked
for a bank like i spent a long time
trying to make a lot of money
the opposite of what they would expect
yeah but like um
yeah but we have a common cause which is
a lot more inequality we want more
equality less inequality right but um
sometimes these guys say things like
capitalism is the problem capitalism is
a broken system and um
basically my worry with that is it's not
specific is it like let's say like your
car wasn't working and you took your car
to the garage and the mechanic said
your car is the problem you know what i
mean like yeah yeah yeah look i know my
car is the problem tell me how to fix it
you know what i mean and like look i'm
an economist alright three years at lse
two years at oxford i was one of the top
traders in the world one of the biggest
banks in the world i've spent years and
years looking at this problem i'm
telling you specifically what is wrong
here what is wrong is inequality of
wealth that's not inequality of income
this is not about doctors and lawyers
and lionel messi right this is about
super super wealthy families
accumulating all the wealth and taking
our wealth right and it's about a tax
system that doesn't tax them and does
tax us that is specifically the problem
okay now
you can have a capitalist system that
has fair taxation you know we don't have
it but you can have it you can have a
capitalist system that does not have
extreme inequality we don't have it but
you can have it like for me
these big words like capitalism
look the system that we have is a
capital system and it has problems but
we can fix them problems okay
so let's fix them you know what i mean
and then you know
i you know i consider myself to be a
capitalist right but this system for me
capitalism is a system where if you work
hard you do your things you study hard
you work hard you make money you get a
house you get a good job you get
financial security but that's not
happening is it what's happening now is
you get house if your dad had a house
you know what i mean yeah really this is
not a capitalist system this is not a
meritocracy this is more like a
feudalist system from the middle ages
where how rich you are is basically
about how rich your dad was or how even
how rich your granddad was you know what
i mean so like what i want
and you can call it capitalism you could
call it socialism you can call it
whatever you want i want an economy
where if you work hard you make your
money or if you work really hard you can
be rich that's what i want i want i want
a society that an economy that gives
people opportunity to have a good house
or if you want to just do your thing and
get financial security as long as you're
willing to to do your work and try hard
you can get that that's what i want i
want an economy that works and
you know
i want a capitalism that works i don't
want a capitalism that is about who your
dad is that's which is what we've got
now and you know personally for me i
don't think it's capitalism yeah now you
you did i've been looking while you've
been speaking for you explain this
beautifully in terms of the cycle of
what happens with obviously covid and
this whole wealth cycle and you broke it
down beautifully in a video on youtube
i've been trying to find it in in the
background whilst you've been speaking i
can't find it what i'm going to do is
i'm going to link it in the description
the show notes of this podcast for
anybody listening
you need to go and watch that video
because it breaks down everything that
gary just said
beautifully there in terms of the cycle
of how this wealth and how this money
circulates and how it feeds
the wealthy people even more
particularly with everything that we've
just been through with covid and furlow
it's it's a cycle that is broken we need
to reconnect those dots so that we've
got something that is sustainable moving
forward and i just
as you were saying that it reminded me
of that video that you made and i think
it's yeah i agree 100 of what you're
what everything you just said there
yeah the kobe thing is because the way
that i made my money
i studied economics before i went into
the city right and if you study
economics at university there's nothing
about inequality basically then i went
into the city and these guys who are
almost all from rich backgrounds are
constantly saying things are going to
get better next year things are going to
get better next year and they weren't
getting better next year and you know i
came to the conclusion that this is
because all of the money that was being
pulled into the economy and there was a
huge amount back in 2008 there's a huge
amount now it wasn't going to ordinary
people it goes to rich people and you
know okay rich people got more money
well rich people they get more money
they don't really spend it because
they're already rich they don't need to
spend more right and so they just use it
to buy houses well that actually makes
all the new people worse off you know so
i'm and then i started betting that
because we're not fixing inequality we
wouldn't fix the economy right so
whenever anything big happens in the
economy i think my extra value added is
i look at
what's going to happen to inequality and
what's that going to mean and that's why
at the beginning of coverage
it was a crazy thing that happened right
because it looked like nobody was losing
right because loads of people lost their
jobs but the government gave them
money money right yeah and then i could
see the government pouring this money
into the system and i was like well
who's getting that money right okay well
ordinary people who can't work are
getting that money but
they're no richer than they were
pre-coded right because that money is
just replacing
what used to be their wages right
so all this money is getting poured in
the people are getting i know richer so
who's richer
oh and i was i was thinking about this
for ages like well where's actually is
the money okay well the money that they
got was coming from the company so maybe
the companies are richer but the
companies weren't richer in kobe because
they lost their customers
so actually the money was sitting with
the customers right it was the customers
who weren't spending but were still
keeping that income that we're getting
richer but not all customers right
because if you're spending like most
people is largely on essentials rent
food bills you ain't accumulating money
it's only if your spending is largely on
luxuries you're accumulating money so
who has very large spending on luxuries
it's richard people yeah exactly so then
i figured it down what's going to happen
is we're going to see a massive increase
in the size of the bank accounts of
wealthier and higher income people and i
called that at the beginning of cover
then i said well wealthy high income
people spend on property stocks and
shares so what you're going to see is
property go up and stocks and shares go
up and i was saying that back in the
beginning of march because i could see i
was analyzing it from an inequality
perspective i could see that it was the
rich were going to make the money that's
what they were going to do and obviously
everyone at the time was saying it's
going to be economic disaster stocks
will fall houses will fall and i was out
there saying these things will go up and
um yeah yeah in the end it's been right
you've made an interesting point which
um i i want to circle back to
and i wonder i don't know whether you
thought about this but as you were
saying it i was like
i think you have a very unique
perspective because of your background
and like
where you grew up like you you said that
the the wealthy guys in the in in in the
bank at the time who were training were
predicting that things were going to get
better you were looking at it from a
point of view well actually no it's not
and i wonder whether
you've
maybe contemplated the fact that maybe
they were just thinking about it's going
to get better for me and my social
economic group
i think not anybody else yeah but you're
looking it from hang on a second i'm
from my social economic economic group
people in my group it's not going to get
better it's going to get worse and
that's been the source of your success
this is
it's so interesting right because if
you're a trader
and you are right when other people are
wrong you can make a lot of money right
a lot of money right and you know that's
how i made my money right so these guys
sitting in the
bank predicting whether things will get
better
you know i was back there in 2011 but it
went on right so in 2009 they said it
would be 2010 2010 2011 2011 2012 and
every single year and even if you go
back to the beginning of 2020 they were
still saying it will get better later
this year every single year that's like
12 13 years it's insane this is if you
watch the penalty shootout and all 20
players hit it off for throwing on the
left side it's like how can you guys be
so bad
it's amazing it's honestly amazing and
um
uh i've thought about for a long time
that how can they be so wrong how can
they be so wrong and um
i think what you're saying is a big part
of it right but it's not conscious the
fact is nowadays you know it's not just
these guys come from rich families they
went to private schools
oxford cambridge harvard yale similar
schools all over the world you know all
their circle is
rich families
you know these guys
they don't know anyone paul they never
even really met anyone poor right so and
you know it's the same at the
universities right so then
they're sitting there you know pockets
bursting with cash and they're saying of
course things are going to get better
because they can't see anything else and
you know we live so much in a world that
is divided now where ordinary people
from ordinary backgrounds they never mix
with these people they can't get into
the same universities they can't get the
same jobs so these guys in these places
in these elite jobs
they're kids basically they've got no
idea they have not like how can you be
an economist when you only know what
life is like for one percent of people
in the richest countries in the world
yeah and the top one percent by the way
you have no idea what it's like for the
remaining 99 percent obviously yes
they're there and it's honestly it's
it's unbelievable how bad people used to
message me saying like oh i'm going to
get a mortgage should i get a fixed or a
tracker right and these
fixed mortgages are set the same way
right they asked the traders our
interest rates going to go up which is
basically is the economy going to
recover and the traders always say it
will go up right so then people are
saying should i get like a five-year
tracker at like three and a half percent
i've seen in the daily mail that
interest rates are gonna go up and i
tell them look don't get the i don't get
the fixed rate because rates ain't never
going to go up and they're like but the
newspapers are all saying it and then
you know and then i say just get the
track because rates won't go up and they
come back to me in six months like how
did you know but then the ironic thing
is this though the newspapers are saying
they're owned by the rich guys that when
they set the fixed rate with the
assumption that interest rates are going
to go up you're putting more money in
their pocket anyway but you're not going
to cycle i think it's even worse than
that i think literally
these guys who all went to the same
schools who all went to the same
university so always patting each other
on the back telling each other how smart
they are they literally just don't
realize what they're doing like i went
to oxford and i said what said to the
professor
you know why have you guys predicted
interest rates wrong for 10 years and he
said to me no that's not right we
haven't played it wrong for 10 years i
couldn't believe it i went back home and
i sent in the data i was like you're
teaching interest rates at oxford
university you've been wrong for 10
years and you haven't even realized
you've done it because look they don't
get punished they don't lose money you
know they're getting paid like so these
guys
it upsets me really because you know i
come from quite a poor area you know i
went to school with like a lot of like
recent immigrant kids that was working
hard and a lot of them were smart and
you know they don't get these
opportunities and then i go to work you
know in these big skyscrapers in canary
war for people been to the top
universities and a lot of them just
don't know what they're doing and it's
it's
it's upsetting i get upset about it you
know i mean but um
yeah i mean i guess it gave me
opportunity to to make the right bets
but yeah i think the these the problem
that we have especially in economics is
like really smart people are not being
drawn into the discipline you know they
only want you if you're like
unbelievably good at maths which means
that you tend to attract quite massive
brain people who are maybe not very
broad-minded
they all tend to come from wealthier
families yeah man
it's upsetting it's upsetting but you
know that's why i'm out there you know
trying to do my thing explain to
ordinary people what's happening as best
as i can
the way you got that job by the way when
you were saying that at the top of this
conversation the the thing that i that
ultimately pops to mind and it's my
favorite movie of all time is um pursuit
of happiness that's what it reminded me
of playing a game one in turn one job
per year you have to go into a kind of
like a a test to kind of get it it
reminded me of that
yeah it was it was a mad thing like lsc
suddenly like everyone was sending all
these series cover letters and like you
know it's that classic thing right like
i was very very good shooting at school
right top gcses top a levels i was good
in my exams but then it come to like
applying for these jobs and these guys
have all got you know like i'm a classic
concert cellist and you know
because and you know they've all got the
top grades you know what i mean and it's
like oh you know i mean i've been to the
antarctica and stuff on their cover
letter and you know i was working in dfs
fluffing pillows you know what i mean
it's like you know to pay for my degree
um and it's that classic thing that kids
from ordinary backgrounds are getting
held away from them jobs because they
don't have the connections they don't
have them like hidden bits of knowledge
and um
yeah obviously i enjoy the fact that i
beat them in a competition but i was
lucky to get that you know what i mean
and it's um you know i talk about
inequality of wealth but the way that
like ordinary kids
are getting like blocked out you know
obviously we've had this week in the
news we've had the gcc and a love
results and we've seen kids from private
schools do much much better even though
they didn't do exams you know what i
mean you just see an ordinary people
getting blocked out at every level and
for me
somebody comes from an ordinary
background i want to be able to go into
these top jobs
and have a diverse group of people there
to talk to you know what i mean and be
able to discuss what's really happening
but you know
i don't want to just be there with a
bunch of rich people saying like
everything's great all the time and you
know i know that gave me opportunity to
make money but like at the same time the
fact is you know it's not just finance
you know nowadays i'm not more involved
in media you know what i mean media is
even worse than finances but everyone
there is like from a super super super
rich background you know what i mean and
it's like
i want to talk about economics so i went
on i did an interview for times radio
and uh they put me on against somebody
you sound like she's never left eaten
you know what i mean and um ian is a
boys school so i guess she didn't go
there but you know i mean whatever the
female equivalent is and she was saying
i was saying look people are struggling
and she was saying what do you mean
everybody's getting richer and i was
thinking in your speech
how can you even say that like these the
problem is that people in the me it's
not the people in media people at
economics departments universities
people that finance they all come from
that elite circle and then they're all
saying things are fine so you know
that's why i might have put videos on
youtube and you know i know you're doing
the same i want to provide the results
for ordinary people
just to hear about economics from
somebody who has you know i understand
that i'm rich now but i grew up poor and
i've got friends who are still like that
my family is still like that somebody
who actually understands it from both
sides of the coin but the problem is
increasingly nowadays because ordinary
people can't get into them top jobs
do this that's hardly anyone yeah
absolutely i did a talk in east london
for a boys academy at the east side uh
youth leaders academy about three weeks
ago and um
so one of my old friends who i used to
work with in canada wharf um he now runs
their like curriculum and he goes you
would be a great person to come and
speak to the kids given your journey and
stuff like that and little did i know
they had someone from the bank they had
the governor bank of england in there
they had about 20 speakers or so and i
didn't know this at the time but i
rocked up and i was like listen this is
how i managed to get through cane wolf
these are the lessons that i've learned
in terms of practicality in terms of
look you may not necessarily be from the
social economic groups of these people
but you i have i firmly believe that
some well it has worked for me anyway
that you have to be able to move between
those worlds seamlessly i just gave him
some really practical tips and you know
he said to me the kid really loved it
and resonated because
i looked like them i sounded like them
and i was pretty much them when i was
their age and i think that's really
really important for
for
uh children and kids from our kind of
background to see examples of this is
possible because i know there were kids
in tower hamlet we'll look at canewolf i
think there's absolutely no way that i'm
going to end up there i don't even
belong
and i believe that actually i don't have
a university degree oh i got a job in
you know met life in canada wharf and
ended up on the exec team was number one
luck first and foremost and sheer hard
work and
learning on on the go how to play the
system how things work and how to
position yourself and how to build
relationships how to leverage all those
kind of things they're practical things
and tangible things that you learn
through the years and those i think need
to be passed down to kids so that they
can also benefit from them as well
yeah for sure
i mean i remember you know i'm 34 now
but i remember like growing up like um
you just don't hear like
voices like
yours like you know and i'm from london
but i could be for anywhere really i
could be from newcastle i could be from
manchester i could be here from
liverpool you know like you kind of know
when you hear somebody's voice like
whether they had like a very privileged
upbringing you know and you just didn't
hear like for me growing up like i just
wasn't hearing voices like mine on the
tv you know what i mean and um
[Music]
yeah i remember like when i was a kid
that was when sort of the grime scene
blew up and people like while in did you
ask for coming out and then for me it
was just like it was amazing just to
hear people who sounded like they were
from where i'm from you know what i mean
it was just to hear voices and you know
you know that's why like i try and
do what i do you know i've got like a
a bbc documentary coming out i want to
like be on tv like just um it's not for
me it's because i want young people to
be able to
hear voices like mine on tv you know i
mean here on the radio and it is
important it does make a difference yeah
but i'm always sort of torn because i
know how difficult it is for young
people like and i don't want to like
i don't want to just give like a track
message like if you work hard you can do
it like the fact is if you're from a
poorer background nowadays you need
everything you need to work hard for
sure you need to be smart for sure but
the fact is you need a bit of luck as
well yeah you know i won that game but
you know it's a bit like you know i was
good at it but i could have lost it on a
day you know what i mean and like
there's a million little things that
could have happened where things could
have gone the wrong way um
so i think it's like it's a double
message what i wanna send to like
younger people is look you can do it you
can do it you need to really work hard
to do it but look if you do work hard
and you don't hit them heights you want
to you need to understand that this
system was was always rigged against you
that doesn't mean you're weak it doesn't
mean you're not smart the fact is
if you're from an ordinary background
i've been there i've been in the sea
there ain't nobody that speaks like me
there you know what i mean so if you're
coming out and you're speaking like me
you're in a difficult position from the
start so wherever you get to i want you
to be proud of where you get to and to
understand that if you don't reach the
heights of you know wherever boris
johnson's seven kids reach that doesn't
mean you're not as smart as them you
know what i mean like so just um
yeah it's balanced look and you know
work hard save your money do what you
can get property
but you know if you don't end up like
with a million pound a year job in the
city
that doesn't mean that you're not as
good as those guys that have that
because we have a system we have a world
that that stops you from getting there
so yeah do every bit you can but like
don't beat yourself up if you don't if
you don't catch up with those people
that started you know 10 miles ahead of
you uh man i i 100
agree with you on that one um yeah 100
i'm on similar path to you at the minute
i'm trying to do more media stuff
because again it's representation i want
kids to be able to you know know where
i've got where i've come from my
background and where i where i got to
and where i am now and in trying to help
people i think
that for i the way the thing that gets
me excited about it is
how inspiring it can be and i think
sometimes you just need someone to like
that fuse and if i could be an example
to a young kid who's 16 17 as that
little spark that sets them off then for
me that would be that makes all of it
worthwhile i would love to be remembered
from a legacy point of view for having
inspired people to maybe
look at things beyond their immediate
environment and dare to just venture but
yeah i agree with 100 what you just said
there mate yeah i mean like if people
have seen you and you know
they feel like there's somebody like me
in that kind of space and you're the
first person they've seen like yeah for
sure they're gonna remember it yeah like
i said i remember you know obviously
i've not gone on the same career path as
people like did you ask one okay you
know but like
these were people being successful that
spoke like me and that were from where
i'm from and that was the first time
that i saw that you know what i mean you
know i used to go down late in orion and
watch the guys like young guys you know
i didn't go into football but i didn't
go into music but just to see like
people that speak like you people that
grew up similar to you that know that
kind of thing being successful like yeah
it's it's important yeah so yeah yeah
keep doing what you're doing yeah you
know you're doing really well lots of
people are seeing your stuff so yeah
keep getting out there man cheers man
look listen i've really enjoyed this
conversation um is there anything that
we haven't covered or anything that you
want to kind of like add into kind of
like closing
i mean i think we've covered the main
stuff we wanted to talk about like
what is wealth that's the main thing
yeah just to recap you know to
understand there's a lot of wealth out
there um ordinary people ain't getting
it it's creating an unfair system where
rich get richer and
and the poor get poorer um
i would like to speak to the older
people that to say that maybe own their
own property that i think they're
winning when house prices go up i would
like to say to them look
think about your kids think about your
grandkids you know if house prices go up
that might look good now but that means
your kids and grandkids can't afford the
house you know what i mean maybe you're
going to have four grandkids maybe
you're going to have 10 or they ain't
all going to live in your house you know
what i mean so um
i would like to say look
do your thing do your hustle work hard
save your money build up your cash but
at the same time
and you'll understand because i did that
but at the same time if you make your
money or even if you don't understand
that as a group ordinary people poor
people are being hurt here and if we you
you need to come together and push that
political side and i'm not talking about
party political here you know you don't
need to you don't 100 need to vote for
the labour party or whatever but push
those politicians say look i'm going to
vote for whoever does something about
wealth inequality seriously demand it
you know and i think things like brexit
for example show and you know people
think what they like about brexit but
they show that if enough people demand
something we can get it so let's start
demanding a more equal
distribution of wealth man make wealth
more equals don't make it so every
single generation it's just the kids of
the rich people um who get rich yeah
demand they get together so look do your
hustle do your thing
but
also especially if you make money come
back and demand that
we have a fair assistant because
otherwise it's our kids and our
grandkids who are gonna pay oh and also
obviously to everyone check out my
youtube and it's all gary's economics
youtube twitter and start i'm putting
videos out there yes indeed so there you
go guys uh instagram gary's economics
youtube gary's economics twitter garrett
economics as well yeah go follow um make
sure that you pay attention to what's
being said here um i
i was delighted that natasha actually
hooked us up on on the on the instagram
because yeah after watching your stuff i
was like okay cool we definitely
definitely definitely need to speak but
we are going to have another uh podcast
episode that will come out after this at
some point we've also got a youtube live
session um actually uh planned as well
so you can watch us have a conversation
just like this one live on youtube and
maybe take take a few questions as well
but
guys thank you so much for for listening
and gary mate thank you so much for this
conversation i've thoroughly enjoyed
this as well um guys until next week
remember money is a tool life is for
living have an amazing week catch you
later